                   TPEM 1.0 SOURCE CODE IMPLEMENTATION
                          NCCOSC RDTE DIV 543
                        49170 PROPAGATION PATH
                       SAN DIEGO CA  92152-7385

INTRODUCTION

    This document describes the source code implementation of the main
calculation routines used in TPEM 1.0.  All the source routines are con-
tained in the file TPEMSUBS.FOR included on this disk and were written 
using the 32-bit Microsoft Fortran Powerstation compiler.

    The user must create a main driver program that calls the routines in
TPEMSUBS.FOR.  A sample driver program is included on this disk called
SAMPLE.FOR and will be discussed in the last section of this document.
There are only two subroutines that the user needs to call from the main
driver program - PEINIT and PESTEP.  PEINIT initializes and processes all
the information that is passed to it by the main driver program.  PESTEP
is then called by the driver program at each range step to propagate the
field forward and returns the propagation loss at specified height output
points.

    In all the following subroutine calls, variables in CAPS in the
parameter list are variables that are returned.

PEINIT

    In order for this routine to initialize and process information for
subsequent calls to PESTEP, information must be passed to it from the
main driver program.  The variables that need to be initialized from the
main program are in the include file TPEM.INC.  Parameter statements are
also included here that set the maximum amount of points in a refractivity
profile, a terrain profile, etc.  These constants are used in TPEM 1.0,
however, the user can change these values to suit their particular
applications.

    Since TPEM is a pure split-step PE model, coverage will not be given
at all heights and ranges specified.  PEINIT automatically determines a
suitable angle such that coverage is given to AT LEAST all heights and 90%
of the maximum range or greater.  This can always be overridden by the user
by specifying an angle for desired coverage in the variable PROPANG (in deg)
in the INPUTVAR structure.

    All variables are described in TPEM.INC.  Once these are initialized,
the call to PEINIT follows:

      call peinit( ef, vnp, rf, sv, tr, HMINTER, ROUT, IERROR )

where EF, VNP, RF, SV, TR, are structures (from TPEM.INC) declared with the
following statements in the main driver program:

      record / errorflag / ef
      record / inputvar / vnp
      record / refractivity / rf
      record / systemvar / sv 
      record / terrain / tr 

    Upon exit, PEINIT returns HMINTER, ROUT, and IERROR.  HMINTER is the
reference height that is determined from the terrain profile passed in the
structure TR.  It corresponds to the minimum terrain elevation in the
terrain profile.  The terrain profile is adjusted by this height in order
to maximize the calculation domain.  All propagation loss values at specified
height output points are referenced to this height.  ROUT is initialized to
0 upon exiting PEINIT in preparation for subsequent calls to PESTEP.  IERROR
is an integer error flag that returns a negative value if an error occurs in
PEINIT.  Here is a list of possible errors and their returned values:

IERROR = Integer value that is returned if any errors exist in input data:
           -6 : Last range in terrain profile is less than RMAX. (Will only
                return this error if error flag EF.LERR6 is set to .TRUE.).
           -8 : HMAX is less than maximum height of terrain profile.
          -10 : Transform size needed to do the given problem is greater than
                the maximum transform size allowed. (Returned from subroutine
                GETFFTSZ).
          -12 : Range of last refractivity profile entered (for range dependent
                case) is less than RMAX. (This is returned from subroutine 
                REFINIT).  Will only return this error if error flag EF.LERR12 
                is set to .TRUE.).
          -14 : Last gradient in any refractivity profile entered is negative.
                (This is returned from REFINIT).
          -17 : Range points in terrain profile are not increasing.
          -18 : First range point is not 0.

PESTEP

    Once the input data has been initialized, and PEINIT returns no error,
calls to PESTEP are made to determine propagation loss at specified range 
steps.  This call follows:

    call pestep( hminter, vnp, rf, tr, ROUT, MLOSS, JSTART, JEND )

ROUT is the current range step in meters.  MLOSS is a 2-byte integer array
(must be declared in main driver program) that contains the propagation
loss in centibels, i.e., MLOSS() = NINT( propagation loss in dB * 10. ).
JSTART is the index at which valid loss points begin in MLOSS().  JEND is
the index at which valid loss points end in MLOSS().  The values in MLOSS()
will always be referenced to the height HMINTER.

    Terrain information is also contained within MLOSS().  All loss values
returned in MLOSS() with a value of 0 represent terrain while all loss
values of -1 represent invalid loss data.  For example, if a terrain profile
is specified, and the number of output height points specified is 5 (NZOUT=5,
in structure INPUTVAR), then for a given output range step less than 90% of
RMAX, MLOSS() may be returned as:

        MLOSS(1) = 0          at height dz
        MLOSS(2) = loss1      at height 2.*dz
        MLOSS(3) = loss2      at height 3.*dz
        MLOSS(4) = loss3      at height 4.*dz
        MLOSS(5) = -1         at height 5.*dz

In this case JSTART will have a value of 2 (since this is the start of
valid loss data), and JEND will have a value of 4 (since this is the end of
valid loss data).  Here, DZ is the output height increment given by
DZ=HMAX/NZOUT, with all loss values referenced to height HMINTER.

SAMPLE.FOR

    Included on this disk is a sample driver program called SAMPLE.FOR.
In order to make a stand-alone executable program that calculates propagation
loss at specified height and ranges over variable terrain, the following files
need to be compiled and linked:

    TPEM.INC
    FFTSIZ.INC
    SAMPLE.FOR
    TPEMSUBS.FOR
    SINFFT.FOR

SAMPLE.FOR determines loss values at heights of 200 m, 400 m, 600 m, 800 m,
and 1000 m at each of these ranges: 20 km, 40 km, 60 km, 80 km, and 100 km.
The environment consists of a homogeneous 300 m surface-based duct with
a wedge terrain profile 10 km wide and 200 m high centered at 50 km.  The
frequency is 1000 MHz.  The antenna is omni, and the antenna height is at
25 m.  The ascii output is written to a file called SAMPLE.OUT, also included
on this disk.
