			  TPEM 1.0 USER'S MANUAL
                           NCCOSC RDTE DIV 543
                          49170 PROPAGATION PATH
                         SAN DIEGO CA  92152-7385

INTRODUCTION

	This document describes the Terrain Parabolic Equation Model (TPEM),
it's operation, and the format required for the environmental and system
input files.

	TPEM calculates and plots propagation loss in dB on a height vs. range
display.  It allows for range-dependent refractivity environments and variable 
terrain.  TPEM is based on methods and source code originally developed by Fred 
Tappert, from the University of Miami, for propagation over a smooth surface.
It is a pure PE model based on the split-step Fourier method and is described
in [1], with a more efficient method described in [2].

	This program was developed for IBM/PC-compatible computers by Amalia
Barrios, NCCOSC RDTE DIV 543, 49170 PROPAGATION PATH, SAN DIEGO CA  92152-7385,
(619) 553-1429, email: barrios@nosc.mil.  The program is written entirely in 
Fortran using the 32-bit Microsoft Fortran Powerstation compiler.

SUMMARY OF CAPABILITIES

1. Accommodates up to 30 M-unit vs. height profiles at arbitrary ranges with
   up to 300 refractivity/height levels for each profile.  The first profile
   must be at range zero.
 
2. Accomodates any general terrain profile up to a maximum of 1000 height/range 
   pairs.  First point must be at range zero.
 
3. Frequency from 100 MHz to 20 GHz.
 
4. Currently allows only horizontal polarization and assumes perfect
   conductivity.
 
5. Antenna height is variable up to the available memory limit specified by
   maximum transform size.
 
6. Antenna patterns: Omni, Gaussian, Sin(x)/x, Cosecant-squared, or generic
   height-finder.
 
7. Vertical beamwidth: .5 to 45 degrees.
 
8. Antenna elevation angle: -10 to 10 degrees.
 
9. No maximum limits on plot range, but is restricted to no less than 5 km.
 
10. Maximum height limited to available transform size and is restricted to
    no less than 100 m.

OPERATION

        Creating a TPEM directory with all the necessary files to run
TPEM is highly recommended.  To execute TPEM, a font environment variable must
be set in your AUTOEXEC.BAT.  The font file MSFONTS.FON residing on the
distribution disk is recommended, but any .FON file that was supplied with
WINDOWS can be used.  If a TPEM directory on the C: drive is created, and
MSFONTS.FON is copied into this directory, then to set the environment
variable simply type 'SET FONT=C:\TPEM\MSFONTS.FON' in your AUTOEXEC.BAT.
Also, the file, DOSXMSF.EXE, must be in the same directory as TPEM or in your
path.  This is the 32-bit DOS extender that allows an executable program
created under Fortran Powerstation to run under DOS.

	Starting TPEM without any arguments on the command line will print a
title page consisting of the program name, author, version, date, and a usage
summary.  To run TPEM there are several options.  The format of the command
line string follows MSDOS conventions.  Depending on the option specified,
however, the command line must follow certain formats.  Options are case-
insensitive.  Following are the allowable command line formats:

         TPEM [/b] [/v] infile
         TPEM /p [/b] [/v] infile sysfile
         TPEM /f infile xr yh envfile outfile
         TPEM /t infile xr yh envfile terfile outfile

         infile = name of input file
         envfile = name of refractivity file
         terfile = name of terrain file
         outfile = file name for ascii output
         sysfile = name of radar system file
         xr = range of output point
         yh = height of output point

The format of the above files is described in the section "FILE FORMATS".
Below is a list of each command line option and its description.

/b   Batch mode.  Useful for batch runs.  With this option, after a coverage
     diagram is displayed, the program automatically exits to the DOS prompt. 
     "infile" must be specified.

/v   View mode.  Useful for viewgraphs.  Uses the labels, LOC, DATE, and TIME,
     (in the refractivity data file) for printing on the right hand side of
     the screen.  "infile" must be specified.

/f   Useful for obtaining propagation loss at a specified range and height
     ("xr" and "yh", respectively) over a smooth (flat) surface.  Parameters
     on the command line that must be specified are: "infile", "xr", "yh",
     "envfile", and "outfile".  The environment file, "envfile", specified
     on the command line will override the file specified in "infile".  This
     option automatically runs in batch mode, so multiple runs can be made
     where the propagation loss determined at different values of "xr" and "yh"
     are stored in ascii in the file "outfile".  "xr"and "yh" are taken to be
     in the same units specified in the file "infile".

/t   Same as the "/f" option, but allows for terrain runs.  Parameters on the
     command line that must be specified are: "infile", "xr", "yh", "envfile",
     "terfile", and "outfile".  The environment and terrain files specified on 
     the command line will override the files specified in "infile". This option
     automatically runs in batch mode, so multiple runs can be made where the
     propagation loss determined at different values of "xr" and "yh" are stored 
     in the ascii file "outfile".  "xr" and "yh" are taken to be in the same  
     units specified in the file "infile".  NOTE:  The height specified by "yh" 
     is taken to be the height above the local terrain at range "xr".

/p   Propagation loss is displayed as probability of detection contours.
     "infile" and "sysfile" must be specified.

        If TPEM is executed under any option other than the /b, /f, or /t
options, changes to the input parameters in "infile" can be made, and TPEM
re-executed, without exiting the program.  Once a coverage diagram has been
displayed, simply type "alt+p" and the user is automatically placed in a
"prompts page" with the cursor at the top.  Here all the parameters specified
in "infile" can be changed by simple editing of each prompt input.  The arrow
keys are used to move up or down each prompt.  Once all changes are made,
press the F10 key and a new coverage diagram will be displayed with the new
input parameters.  In addition, while in the "prompts page", the title can
be changed by pressing "alt+t" and simply typing an alternate title, followed
by ENTER.

        While in the "prompts page" the lines RF, TF, and EF refer to the
refractivity file name, terrain file name, and EREPS compatible file name,
respectively.  At these prompts the user can enter a new refractivity file,
terrain file, or EREPS binary file for storage output.  Inputs for the
antenna pattern, height units, and range units, can be changed by pressing
the <space> bar.  The parameters for these prompts will then be toggled
through their available options.  To eliminate unnecessary information from
the right hand side of the screen (for "cleaner" hardcopies or viewgraphs),
press F1.  This will toggle the displaying of the lower half of the input
information on the right hand side of the screen.

EXAMPLE TPEM COMMAND LINES

TPEM TPEM.INP:
This is the most basic run of TPEM.  Invoking this command will produce a 
coverage diagram with the parameters specified in the file TPEM.INP.

TPEM /b TPEM.INP:
This produces a coverage diagram with parameters specified in TPEM.INP and
exits back to the DOS prompt.  In a typical use, this would be just one 
command line of several in a batch file in which TPEM was executed with 
several different input files.

TPEM /t TPEM.INP 100. 30.5 300MSBD.MET LONGBMU.TER DATAOUT:
This produces a coverage diagram with the parameters specified in TPEM.INP,
but with the refractivity and terrain files specified by 300MSBD.MET and
LONGBMU.TER on the command line. In addition, if the units used are metric,
the propagation loss at a range of 100 km and a height of 30.5 m above the
ground (at 100 km) is stored in the ascii file DATAOUT.

TPEM /p TPEM.INP RADAR.SYS:
This produces a coverage diagram in which loss thresholds are determined from 
radar system information given in RADAR.SYS and 10% to 90% probability of
detection.

FILE FORMATS

	In all the following files, comments are specified by a pound sign (#)
in the first column of a line.  There is no limit to the number of comment
lines in a file, as they are ignored by TPEM.  All files are assumed as ascii
and file names follow DOS conventions.

infile:
Below is an example input file.  All parameter inputs are self-explanatory.
NOTE:  all input parameters must be followed by a colon on the same line.
Antenna patterns are specified by typing only the first letter of desired
pattern.  Due to numerical constraints, the maximum height is limited to no
less than 100 m and the maximum range is limited to no less than 5 km.
The maximum propagation angle is an optional input that allows the user 
to override the internal calculation by TPEM.  If left at 0, TPEM will
automatically calculate a maximum angle such that coverage is obtained at all
heights and AT LEAST 90% of the maximum plot range.  If the user wishes to see
greater coverage (at higher angles), then any value (within reason - less than
20 degrees) can be specified and TPEM will use this angle.  Specifying a
filename in the last line of the input file will produce an EREPS compatible
binary file that contains all the propagation loss information of the coverage
diagram.  This file can be read by EREPS (dated on or after 11 August 1995) to
display loss vs. range at any receiver height, or height vs. loss at any
receiver range.  For the format of this binary file, refer to EREPS 3.0
documentation.

#TPEM Version 1.0 input file
M             : Height units (M = meters, FT = feet)
KM            : Range units (M,KM=kilometer,NM=nautical mile,SM=statute mile)
1000.         : Frequency in MHz (100 to 20000)
25.           : Transmitter height in above units
O             : Ant pattern(Omni, Gaussian, Sin(x)/x, Csc-Sq, Ht-finder)
30            : Beamwidth in degrees (full 3 dB to 3 dB width)
0             : Elevation angle in degrees
0             : Maximum propagation angle in degrees.
500           : Maximum height in above units
300.          : Maximum range in above units
115           : Minimum propagation loss in dB for color scale
5             : Propagation loss increment in dB for color scale
12            : Number of colors (or contours) for coverage diagram
300msbd.met   : DOS file name for environment (refractivity profiles)
	      : DOS file name for terrain profile (Blank assumes smooth surface)
	      : DOS file name for EREPS output. Blank gives no EREPS output.

envfile:
Below is an example refractivity environment file.  All refractivity profiles
must be specified in terms of height/M-unit pairs, where the first column is
the height at each refractivity level and the second column contains the
M-unit value at that level.  The first refractivity profile must always be at
range 0.  For range-dependent environments, subsequent profiles can be added
following the same rules.  Each subsequent profile must be preceded by the
RANGE keyword and range value for that particular profile, and all profiles
must have the same number of refractivity levels.  All height levels in
refractivity profiles are assumed to be relative to mean sea level.  There
are several key words in the environment files that are recognized by TPEM.
All keywords must be preceded by the "at" (@) symbol and must be followed by
a space.  List of keywords and their definitions:

LABEL -(optional) indicates a 12-character descriptor of the environment is to 
       follow.  This is used as the environment label to be printed on the
       right hand side of the screen display.

LOC - (optional) indicates a 12-character descriptor of the location of the 
      refractivity profile is to follow.  This is used only with the "view-
      graph", or "/v" option.

DATE - (optional) 12-character descriptor of date of refractivity profile to
       follow.  This is used only with the "viewgraph", or "/v" option.

TIME - (optional) 12-character descriptor of date of refractivity profile to
       follow.  This is used only with the "viewgraph", or "/v" option.

RANGE - (required) followed by a number and a character units descriptor
	indicates the range and units of the refractivity profile.  Acceptable
        unit descriptors are: KM (kilometers), NM, (nautical miles), SM,
	(statute miles).

HEIGHT - (required) followed by a units descriptor indicates the units of
	 height levels of the profile.  Acceptable unit descriptors are:
         M (meters), FT(feet).

#Environment file for TPEM 1.0 - Standard Atmosphere
@label Stand Atm
@range 0. km
@height m
0.         0.
1000.      118.

terfile:
Below is an example terrain file.  All terrain profiles must be specified in
terms of range/height pairs, where the first column contains the range and
the second column contains the terrain elevation, or height, at that range.
All range points or values must be increasing, and the first terrain elevation
point must be at range 0.  TPEM allows a maximum of 1000 range/height pairs.
A warning will occur if this is exceeded.  Keywords must be given on the same
line and followed by a colon.  Keywords are described below.

LABEL - (optional) followed by a space and an 80-character string describing
        the terrain profile, i.e., latitude, longitude, city, country, etc.
        This will be centered and printed at the top of the coverage
        diagram.

RANGE - (required) followed by a character units descriptor indicates the
        units of range values to follow.  Acceptable unit descriptors are:
        M (meters), KM (kilometers), NM (nautical miles), SM (statute miles).

HEIGHT - (required) followed by a character units desciptor indicates the units
         of following height values.  Acceptable unit descriptors are: M
         (meters), FT (feet).

#TPEM 1.0 terrain file - Wedge centered at 50 km. - 200 m high and 10 km wide
@label Wedge centered at 50 km
@range: km   height: m
0.             0.
45.            0.
50.          200.
55.            0.
100.           0.

sysfile:
Below is an example radar system file for use with the "/p" option in producing
coverage diagrams in terms of probability of detection contours.  Inputs are
self-explanatory and the value of the numeric parameters are the defaults given
in EREPS 3.0 in the program COVER.  The quantities in brackets at the end of
each line refers to the numerical bounds for that particular parameter.  If
a value is entered outside of these bounds, then TPEM will produce an error
and abort.  For an explanation of what is meant by "simple" or "integrated"
calculations, refer to the EREPS 3.0 documentation.  As with the input file,
all input parameters must be followed by a colon on the same line.

#TPEM 1.0 Radar system file with default parameters used in EREPS 3.0 - COVER.
S              : Radar calculation type; S-Simple, I-Integrated
I              : Coherent or Incoherent integration (only for I radar calc.)
1              : Number of pulses ( only for I radar calc )
21             : Antenna Gain (dB) [0 to 100]
11             : Horizontal Beamwidth (deg) [>0 to 90]
6              : Horizontal scan rate (rpm) [1 to 1000]
200            : Peak Power (kW) [.1 to 1.e4]
60             : Pulse width (microsec) [.1 to 1.e4]
300            : Pulse repetition frequency (pps) [1 to 1.e4]
6              : System loss (dB) [0 to 100]
5              : Noise figure (dB) [0 to 100]
10.            : Radar cross section (sqm) [>0 to 1.e5]
1.e-8          : Probability of false alarm [1.e-4 to 1.e-12]
1              : Swerling case  0-steady, 1-fluctuating

COMMENTS

1. For range-dependent refractivity environments, if the maximum plot range
   given is greater than the range of the last profile, a warning is given
   and the user is prompted to continue the run.  If the user answers "y(es)"
   TPEM will produce a coverage diagram out to the maximum range specified,
   with the refractivity environment taken to be homogeneous between the range
   of the last profile and the maximum range.  If the answer is "n(o)" the
   run is aborted.

2. If the number of points in the terrain profile exceeds the maximum allowed,
   a warning is given and the user is prompted to continue the run.  If the
   answer is "y(es)", TPEM will ignore the remaining points in the terrain
   profile and will use only those range/height pairs up to the 1000-point
   maximum allowed.  If the answer is "n(o)" the run is aborted.

3. If the last range point in the terrain profile is less than the maximum
   plot range, a warning is given and the user is prompted to continue the run.
   If the answer is "y(es)", TPEM will assign the last point in the profile
   to be equal to the maximum plot range and the elevation height to be equal
   to the last height given in "terfile".

4. All antenna pattern and sidelobe effects are handled as in EREPS 3.0.
   For details refer to the EREPS 3.0 documentation.

5. Since TPEM is a pure split-step PE model, coverage is angle and height
   limited.  TPEM is designed to automatically calculate an angle, given the
   input parameters, such that coverage is obtained at all heights from
   90% of the maximum range onward.  At lesser ranges, coverage will then
   be reduced in height.  If the user wishes to see greater coverage, i.e.,
   higher angles, the maximum propagation angle can be specified with a
   non-zero (positive) value in "infile".

6. System requirements for TPEM 1.0 are: IBM/PC or compatible with an EGA
   or VGA graphics adapter in addition to DOS and other resident programs.
   TPEM was written under Microsoft Fortran Powerstation (32-bit compiler),
   therefore, at least 4Mb of extended memory is also required.

7. All coverage diagrams are displayed with a minimum height of 0.  This,
   however, does not necessarily indicate mean sea level (msl).  Coverage
   diagrams with terrain profiles are displayed such that the minimum height
   of the terrain profile is used as the reference height.  For example, if
   the minimum elevation height for a particular terrain profile is 1000 m
   above msl, and the maximum plot height specified is 2000 m, a coverage
   diagram will be displayed with the height axis ranging from 0 to 2000 m,
   however this 0 height is referenced to 1000 m above msl.  This is indicated
   on the right hand side of the screen, above the environment label, by
   the line "REFHT m   XXXX.X", where "XXXX.X" is the particular value of
   the reference height for a given terrain profile.  In this case, the
   coverage diagram represents the field coverage over a particular terrain
   profile from 1000 m to 3000 m above msl.
   Keep in mind:
         Height axis displayed on screen =  0  to HMAX
         What height axis actually represents =  REFHT to HMAX+REFHT
   where HMAX = the maximum plot range and REFHT = the reference height that
   is internally determined by TPEM.

8. The antenna height entry in the input file always refers to the
   antenna height above the local ground at range 0.

9. To read EREPS compatible binary files created by TPEM, download
   EREPS30.EXE (dated after 11 August 1995) from the web site "http://www.
   sunspot.nosc.mil/543/software.html".  This is a self-extracting file
   that creates several programs (PROPR, PROPH, COVER, etc.) which can
   then be used to read TPEM binary files.

10. When reading TPEM binary files through PROPR, loss is plotted vs. range
    at a specified height.  This height is relative to the reference height
    displayed on the right hand side of the screen by the line "REFHT XXXX.X".

11. When reading TPEM binary files through PROPH, loss is plotted vs. height
    at a specified range.   Here, heights are relative to the local ground
    height + the reference height at the specified range.  This is displayed
    on the right hand side of the screen.


REFERENCES

1. A.E. Barrios, "A Terrain Parabolic Equation Model for Propagation in the 
   Troposphere", IEEE Trans. on Ant. and Prop., Vol. 42, No. 1, January 1994,
   pp.90-98.

2. A.E. Barrios,"Terrain and Refractivity Effects on Non-Optical Paths", AGARD
   Conf. Proc. 543, Multiple Mechanism Propagation Paths (MMPPs):  Their
   Characterisation and Influence on System Design, October 1993, pp. 10-1 to
   10-9.
